hello everyone and welcome to the latest
oxford big question live stream uh where
today we will be discussing the
question could there be real life x-men
uh i will be your host for the next 45
minutes i am dr tom crawford
i am a mathematician at the university
of oxford
i also do lots of things on youtube uh
with my own channel tom roxmax and also
with numberphile
this is our first event using this new
uh format on on teams so i do have a few
bits of admin just to get out of the way
so we could all have a nice time we have
a really enjoyable uh discussion around
the question
uh so first of all um please make sure
your video and audio are turned off
uh throughout the event the uh entire
uh event will be recorded uh and then
this will go on youtube so you can watch
it back afterwards which will hopefully
be fun
um we will also be our panel in fact
we'll be referencing
the activity packs uh throughout the um
the discussion um if you've done these
great
and i'm sure they will be very useful
but don't worry at all if you haven't
it's not essential to have done these so
if you hear the word activity pack and
start to panic
don't worry you will still be able to
follow everything that is being
discussed
um so the things we have for you today
we've made this extremely
uh interactive event as much as we can
in the current situation
uh so we've got brain training uh for
you coming later we have a quiz
uh on superhero animals which i'm
personally really looking forward to
i don't actually know the answers yet uh
and we even have a very special guest
in the form of a real life spider
so stay tuned for that one as
always with these events we want you to
get involved so please do send in your
questions
um to the panel using the chat
so just if you have any comments or any
questions you want to put to our experts
write them in the chat and then they'll
be passed to me and then i will read out
some of those questions and put them to
our expert panel there will be a prize
for the most thought provoking question
uh so not only do you get to
an answer to your question you also win
prizes this is
really really a fantastic event um the
the winner of that prize will be
announced on
social media probably tomorrow or within
the next uh few days
so it's probably about time we met our
panel who've been
sitting patiently waiting uh so to kick
us off we have
beth beth would you like to uh introduce
yourself to our audience
hello i'm dr beth mortimer i'm a
biologist and spider enthusiast
i work at the department of zoology at
the university of oxford
and yeah i work on spiders it's
especially spider senses and how they
use vibrations which we'll find out more
about
uh during this demonstration
i like how you said spider senses
because i'm immediately picturing
spider-man saying
my spidey senses are tingling
but i'm sure i won't i mean we won't go
into that just yet i'm sure we you can
tell us more about
um exactly what you read when we come to
your demonstration with the
with the spider um later thank you very
much
so yeah we've got a lot of all right
okay
it's gone i think somebody remember to
mute your microphones everybody
so i um i am dr juan manuel galeazzi
gonzalez is a
very long name so if you just call me
juan it's fine
and i'm just here in the university of
oxford
i'm trying to figure out how the brain
works
um and i think that's it yeah we're
gonna talk a little bit about that
perfect so figuring out how the brain
works that sounds tricky i'll be honest
so um so anything to do with the braid
neuroscience
uh etc that would be perfect for one
to to get stuck into uh and then after
the final member of the panel uh
is test test you want to say hello yes
hello everyone
uh my name is tess johnson i am studying
a phd or d
phil at the university of oxford in
philosophy
so my work specifically looks at
human enhancement so it's very x-men
related but
i don't look so much at how we can do
these things but more
whether or not we should actually be
trying to do them at all
so all of the shoulds um send them send
them my way
um and i was thinking about this
question earlier
i was thinking that what superpowers
would i want if i could be an x-men and
i think i've got to say
mind reading would just blows everything
else out of the water
so i'm with you on that yeah yeah
i think i think what is it is it
professor professor zavier presser x the
leader of the expert right he's the like
mind reading uh yeah yeah yeah that was
that is a very good one
um awesome thank you very much uh tess
and thank you to all of our our panels
so now you've got a little bit of a feel
of um of what our panel working then
hopefully that's starting to give you
some ideas for questions that they might
uh love to answer um so now we've got
some demonstrations as promised
now we've met the panel uh each each
member of the panel does have
a sort of short demonstration and a
little bit of a discussion
based around our big question can there
be real life
x-men so i believe beth you're gonna
kick us off with our superstar guest
that's right well the guest will be
arriving shortly
um so just to put a little bit of
context over what i do so i
i study animals uh but i'm interested in
how nature has come up
with solutions uh to various problems
that are faced by animals
so i'm particularly interested in
developing
new technologies that are inspired by
animals
so if we take spiders as an example
spiders are
very good at using materials that they
make themselves
to make a web which is obviously used to
capture prey
now they use this out of normal
kind of protein materials so they
basically turn flies
into a very very strong material so if
we study how nature
is able to uh generate these solutions
for example for materials
or for sensing as well which we'll come
to
then you can make uh efficient uh
technologies that we can use
to uh enhance ourselves via using
technology as tools so what i'm going to
try and do now is
share a video this video should be
very familiar uh in terms of the context
so if i share my screen
and this video is going to play a few
times
so hopefully tom will nod that he can
see the video
yeah okay so we have a bumblebee here
that is hitting a spider's web
so a lot of you will be familiar with
this type of web it's called an orb web
because basically it's got these spokes
of silk threads
that meet in the middle like the spokes
of a bicycle
so what i want you to do is you're
looking at this video
is in the chat feature within teams
can you please put down some words that
you associate
with this video so adjectives or
descriptive words
for how you might describe what the web
is doing so please take a few seconds
then
uh to put some suggestions into the chat
feature
can i can i just add that i find it
mildly terrifying
for the poor bee that's being trapped
knowing what is coming next
i don't know if that counts as as a
descriptive word but
well you might in that particular video
the spider wasn't there so that the bee
was okay
okay
okay we've got lots and lots of
different things coming through
i'm going to pick out a few um keep them
coming for another
few seconds or so
this is great stuff guys okay i'm gonna
skip over the kind of
death and trapped theme and go for more
okay so we've got sticky uh restrictive
we've got um strength
um so these are some um
so we've got lots of words that we can
talk through okay
uh you can start with the suggestions
now thank you
so um at this point then i'm going to
show you our little friend so hopefully
it worked out best if i kind of position
her
right in front of my face so
this is a spider that you would find
in the gardens at the moment so
uh he is a garden orb weaver spider
and in fact i picked this spider out
from my garden
this morning so there's lots of big
females around at the moment
so what i want you to be able to
appreciate if i turn her around
so most people know about spiders
obviously
eight legs but what they've also got
right at
this end of their abdomen they've got
what's called the spinnerets
and the spinnerets make silk so you
might have heard of silk in terms of
textiles and clothes but spiders
make silk to make their web
so thinking back to that video people
came up with words like
strong so absolutely what this material
is able to do
is it doesn't break when the fly when
the
bee hits the web and it's able to stop
the bee so that the spider can catch it
so that's
absolutely the first property of this
spider web this
is that it has this strength and in fact
if you scaled up a spider web
so that each one of the threads was the
diameter
of your little finger so going up from
very small to the diameter of your
finger
it could absorb the same amount of
energy as a boeing 747 at full
speed so these are amazing materials
in terms of their strength and they
achieve this because they're so small
and for the spider they have to use the
minimum amount of material
and get the maximum amount of benefit
out of it
so the second kind of group of words
that you came out with
uh was kind of sticky and kind of
retaining or
having the the be hostage within the web
so that's actually a different type of
silk which was going round the web
that is the sticky capture spiral and
the job of that is to retain the bee
long enough so that the spider can get
to it
so lastly um what i'm particularly
interested in
in terms of spider sensing is the
ability of the web
to actually transmit vibrations so the
spider knows
that the bee is in there because it can
feel the movement
of the web and that's what my research
particularly looks at
so thinking about how this ties in with
our question then
what i'm what our research is interested
in looking at is
can we learn from how spiders make
these strong materials that are very
thin
out of protein materials so natural
materials
can we make energy efficient materials
that can be used to replace plastics for
example
but also from the sensing side of things
can we make
can we use similar types of sensors that
spiders use
so just to finish off uh with one
thought from our spider here so
the main sense for this spider is their
ability to feel vibrations
and they actually have over a thousand
ears
effectively spread out on their legs so
they're extremely sensitive to small
movements
um so i look forward to receiving uh
questions to do with spiders
specifically but also
uh anything to do with animals i'd be
happy to chat through
so thank you awesome thank you beth
and i i genuinely never knew a spider
had even water
never mind a thousand so that is
absolutely my fun fact of the day so far
so thank you very much
uh for sharing that with us um right so
next in line we have juan juan would you
like to
um show us your demonstration please yes
of course
uh so before we actually start the
activity i would like to just
share some slides with you
related to this topic so let me know if
you can
you can see the presentation maybe tom
can you
oh good thumbs up okay great so um
yeah like i said so before we begin the
activity i would just like to say a
couple of things regarding the the big
question
on whether there could be real life
x-men
and as you might remember i work as a
neuroscientist so i try to
figure out how our brains our brains
work and they they can do very
remarkable things so actually i will try
to
make the case that maybe we already are
sort of you know superhero x-men um
and if you think about it uh humans and
and not only humans but spiders like
beth was talking about we are the
product of thousands of years of genetic
variations and mutations
and it is through evolution by natural
selection
that we are now capable of displaying
amazing behavioral and cognitive
abilities
that we often take for granted because
we don't think they are that impressive
just because you know all humans can do
that
it's like you know all spiders might not
think that it's impressive to do a
spider wave because
a spider web because they can all do
that but if you're not a spider you
think that that's remarkable
um so from 30h we're capable of using
our bodies to display
amazing behavioral abilities so we can
we can adjust and modify our behaviors
to
to achieve a wide range of goals um but
i mean obviously i'm showing you footage
of quite impressive things that kids can
do from a very early age
but even everyday activities can
actually
show a quite complex uh type of
behaviors
and you know i'm also working i'm trying
to figure out how the brain works
because i'm also interested in
artificial intelligence
so same as uh the beth the approach that
that was talking about
how they are interested in looking at
nature and how nature develops certain
things to
to then create technology we're also
interested in how
uh how is it that we can create more
intelligent machines right
uh so in recent years when you see
perhaps computers or or robots that are
outperforming humans
especially on things that we we think
that are very difficult to do like you
know playing chess or
or playing go we we might tend to feel
that
maybe we're not that smart if machines
can beat us of that
but um actually uh there's an anecdote
um
there's there was a roboticist called
hans moribeck
and hanson arabic worked for many years
developing robots
and he realized that paradoxically some
of the simplest things
that we perform every day like i don't
know lifting a cop
going up and down stairs kicking a ball
playing football are actually quite
quite difficult to
to implement them in a robotic platform
so we don't have
good robots for these activities and
just to illustrate this point i'm going
to show you
a footage from one of the top robotic
competitions
not that long ago and basically the
robots all they needed to do was to go
through an obstacle course
and they had to do very very simple
things like opening a door and entering
a room
and taking something out of that room
which is something that is trivial for
us because we do it every day
but you know some of the things that we
think are the simplest and more trivials
because just because we don't have we
don't we do it effortlessly
are actually very difficult to do are
very difficult problems to solve and we
do
that without any effort so that is
impressive we don't get it too impressed
because we just do it every day and
everyone can do that so nobody's going
to think that it's impressive that you
go up the stairs but actually when you
actually want to make a robot that
does that efficiently you realize it's a
really hard problem and we solve these
problems
every day um so yes so maybe i i i
started
by trying to convince you that that we
are amazing and maybe we already have
superpowers but
i mean we also have some limitations and
it's that's also part of my research to
try to
figure out you know there are things
that we evolved to be good at but there
are also things that we're
our brains are not particularly well
suited for
and and now this is basically we're
going to show
this through a quick example a quick
demonstration so i hope i hope this
runs properly but if you cannot see it
we
we have another option on how to do it
but uh basically what i'm gonna show you
a clip and and this clip is gonna is
gonna have some flickering images
and at some point something in that
image is going to change
so uh i'll i'll let it run for a few
seconds and then after i stop it then
i'll see if anyone could spot what
changed in that
in that video all right so this is the
picture
then let's just give it a bit and then
it's going to be flickering
i feel like i'm playing spot the
difference it is it is a little bit like
that
so i'm just going to open the comments
now just to see
if people were able to figure out where
the changes are let me see if i can see
them
um exactly so we had one person spotting
it
all right yes yes actually yeah a lot of
fun i didn't i
absolutely did not see that so very very
well
so the engine disappeared right so
if you all pay attention to the engine
it's very very obvious
you know it goes away right so
there's the engine and it goes away but
uh you know obviously
we do it in a proper setting and because
obviously here is displayed in a big
screen but
you know it's actually not that easy to
spot sometimes and there are tons of
examples of this so i'm going to show
you another one
and then and then see if you can figure
out what changes here
um oh this is slightly different this is
uh you basically have to count the
passes of the one
right how many passes
okay so some people actually spotted
some some something interesting that
went on in the video
so i'm just going to play it again to
see yeah exactly
all right so i'm going to play it again
i'm going to play the last part
so basically there was a moonwalking
bear some of you spotted it
and that's great but sometimes if you do
this experiment with people like
almost half the people miss the fact
that there was a man
dressed with a costume of a bear moon
walking through the entire image
so there are tons of examples and and
you know like
i in the word document we called it
brain teases but each experiment has
a particular name to you know show us
how we have sometimes some attentional
limitations
uh some memory limitations we're
focusing attention
resources to one particular spot we
might miss something else
that goes on around so basically i'll
just conclude by saying that yes we we
might all be
you know x-men already or have amazing
powers we just don't notice it because
we all have them
but at the same time like all
superheroes we also have some
limitations
that we need to you know bear in mind
and take into account
so that yeah that would be that would be
it so i'll
that that was fantastic the uh i again i
i did not spot the bear the first time
and then the second time
once you like similar to the picture
once you point it out
you then spot it don't you it's almost
like how did i miss that
the first time so i think that was a
great example um
right so that just leaves us with our
third and final panel member
so tess over to you to discuss ethics
thank you very much tom um that was yeah
i'm really enjoying myself so far
it seems like all of these activities
have been
running really well and my activity
for today for those of you who have had
the chance to take a look at it
we're doing some philosophical thought
experiments we're having a think
about what we would do if we were in
certain situations where we could
actually
have x-men for our own children so no
matter for those of you who didn't get
through the activity pack
what i'm going to do at the moment is
just present to you
this thought experiment i want you to
put yourself in this situation
and have a think about how you would
react
but before we get on to the actual
question itself i just want to talk to
you a little bit
about what might be a way that we could
have
um x-men in the future and obviously
there are ways that we've already
discussed in terms of
you know maybe we can um maybe
there are ways that we could create
environments where we can sense
vibrations better or maybe we could have
better attentional
awareness to our surroundings or things
like
training to be stronger one of the most
new and promising ways that we could
have to actually um
create you know x-men like abilities in
the future
is something that i work on in my
research called
genome editing and i don't do
the practical part of it um but what i
do is look at the ethics
look about look at questions about
whether or not we should be
making these changes so genome editing
is where we take our own building blocks
our own dna
our blueprint for our bodies and we can
actually
kind of chop into that dna with new
genetic tools that we have these days
and we can replace parts of our dna
we've changed changed sequences so that
our whole blueprint is different
now the science isn't quite there yet
for some of the more
um out there or radical changes that you
might feel like you would want to make
to your genome um but as we get
better knowledge of what this blueprint
what our dna actually is
and the effects that cutting and pasting
little bits and pieces have
we're going to quite soon have the
ability to
crazy new abilities these enhancements
and you can have them all the way from
birth so
i look specifically at making changes to
um before babies are born when they're
still
embryos so that when they're born they
could have
say maybe enhanced memory if we could
find out
um more specifically which genes in the
genome we would have to change
to give to give humans
better maybe ability to retrieve
long-term memory when we're learning so
we can learn faster
or maybe super strength what helps us to
develop muscle fast in our genome and
how could we change the levels of that
development so that we're all super
strong
now as i said some of this is sci-fi a
little bit still but some of it you know
we've got to start
asking these questions not only about
what we can do
but about what we should do in the
future
before we actually get there and are
faced with the question of
is this scientist going to do this um
this change so the thought experiment
that i have for you today
looks a little bit at that um
[Music]
so i want you to imagine that
in say a couple of decades time
you decide with your partner that you
want to become a parent
and just a few years ago there was this
new gene tool that came on the market
and um the gene tool that it's likely to
be in the future
well that is already being used in
similar ways is called crispr cast9
some of you might have heard about it
already and this allows us to
as i said copy and past or cut and paste
into our genomes and change the way that
we work
so let's say that this is now available
in the future and if you ask your doctor
or if you ask someone in healthcare they
will let you
go in and say okay i want you to take
some of my genetic material and use it
to make a baby so we might take some
eggs and some sperm put them together in
a dish
and then test out what the genome
what the dna is of the fertilized
of the fertilized zygote or embryo so
when we do that we could make a change
and
let's say that you love boxing
and what you really really want is a
child who also loves boxing
and not only loves it but is really
really good at it
so in order to make that happen you
might want your child
to have super strength so maybe you can
go to your doctor
and say hey doc i really want my
future child to have super strength and
they say
okay we have this great crispr cast nine
tool
um here it is we're going to make this
happen for you
and then the child is born and they're
super strong and they might be really
good at boxing
so this is the kind of situation that i
want you to think about
not in terms of whether it might be
possible but
in terms of what we should do in that
situation
so the first question i want to ask you
and please do reply
in the chat function is is this a good
reason
to you to make this kind of gene edit
to your future child is your love of
boxing as a parent
a good reason to make a super strong
child so i'll give you a minute to think
about that and we'll see what you come
up with in the chat
just why um why everyone's having to
think about that i think
it's also look would have it uh worth
mentioning that today
the crispr gene editing uh technology
that you've mentioned there
tess of course was awarded the chemistry
nobel prize
uh today yeah it's very exciting it just
shows how soon all of this could really
be a reality but technology
is essentially there we just need a bit
more of the research knowledge to we're
having to really answer these questions
yeah great i think i think there's a
general feeling amongst the
replies that i'm seeing definitely i
think we have
um a lot of responses in the negative
here
so a lot of you are saying that you have
some concerns with this and that's great
we definitely want to think about
the ethical concerns there some people
are saying
no it's our imperfections i can see here
a great response
um our child wouldn't be human if they
didn't have any imperfections
so just because you can make this change
doesn't mean that you should
and i think that highlights like maybe
that should come into a parent's
reasoning a parent's decision-making
around this
just because our child isn't super
strong or just because
they might not be able to be as good at
boxing as we would like them to
maybe maybe that's not a good reason
when we think about how
humid it is to be imperfect that's
really good
i think that some other highlights here
maybe we could sorry sorry to introduce
maybe we could um i'm just conscious of
time perhaps you could pick up on some
of those comments
uh during the discussion so if anyone
has any sort of questions based
around the responses then then we can
sort of pick those back up
because i'm really excited for this quiz
that i want to get onto and of course we
want to make sure that we can put
everyone's questions
definitely that sounds good i'm looking
forward to talking about them more later
awesome thank you tess uh right so as
promised that's into that here is a
a very short quiz um so we're gonna do
an absolute whistle stop tour
through this quiz so we're gonna ask you
some questions about some animals and
basically you're gonna get about 10
seconds to do each one
so first thing that comes into your head
that's your answer and that's probably
the best way to play this quiz as well
right so question one which of these is
the deadliest animal on earth
to humans is it the mosquito the hippo
the rattlesnake or crocodile so either
knot your answer down
or stick it in the chat right and that's
it that's all the time you're getting
question two
which of these animals cannot repeat
cannot change color is it the chameleon
the stone the octopus or the rainbow
lorikeet
so again uh write your answers uh in the
chat or note them down on your paper we
will be giving you the answers
at the end of the broadcast so you can
you can check
and see how you did uh later on right
question three
which of these animals has the longest
memory uh this was a good one so which
of these animals
has the longest is it the elephant
the bottlenose dolphin the chimpanzee
or the eagle owl so
elephant bottle nose dolphin chimpanzee
or eagle owl which one has the longest
memory okay two more questions
number four what superpower do these
animals share so we have a zebra fish
we have a deer we have a starfish
and we have a mexican salamander and
your possible answers are
do they all have amazing hearing do they
have incredible strength
can they all repair parts of their
bodies or
do they have excellent night vision
which of those four superpowers can be
seen
in the zebrafish the deer the starfish
and the mexican salamander and now our
final question
which of these sea creatures can make
themselves invisible which of these
creatures
can make themselves invisible is it the
jellyfish
the shrimp or sardines
so that's going to be our final question
so again
i'm going to sort of apologize that it
was done really quickly but
the best way to answer is just to write
down the first thing that comes into
your head in all honesty
and i'll reveal the answers at the end
of the
broadcast um so that does bring us on
now to our panel discussion so i can see
there's been lots of questions
um coming in uh from everybody so thank
you so much
i'm just gonna scroll down and find some
of these um
that jump out at me so i think seeing as
um
bec we started with you so there's a
question here because i really liked
your fact about
ears so we've got jack and zara from
stockwood park
hello jack and zara they have asked what
do you mean by spiders having
ears on their legs and how do the ears
on their legs function
that's a great question so obviously
with human ears
which we most think about an ear we
detect
vibration in the air with our ears so
spiders
in fact have hundreds of hairs which
they
detect a vibration in the air so it will
catch the air currents
and the hairs will vibrate so they have
them distributed across their legs
but they also have the ability to detect
vibrations that come through the silk so
it comes through the web
into their foot and then it's detected
by basically very small little slits
that they have in their exoskeleton so
that covering
over their legs so they have these two
types of sensors so that they can detect
vibrations through the air or vibrations
through the ground
and that's what i mean by an ear so an
ability to detect these vibrations
yeah so i mean when you first mentioned
it i was literally picturing like a
thousand little ears sort of
like humanoids growing on their legs of
course as you've explained it's not
how you know what they would look like
it's more it's the detection of
vibration
um brilliant thank you very much beth
and thank you again jack and zara for
the question
um so we've got another one i think this
one's for you juan um
so this has come in from um
evelyn evelyn evelyn at denmark road
high school
uh and this question is if humans are
able to multitask
how come we weren't able to see the bear
yeah so that's a good question so it's
interesting because
our attentional resources we use them
for different things
in different sort of tasks depending on
whether we need to pay attention or not
so when we are starting to learn
something that we haven't done before
and it might be a bit difficult to do i
i don't know maybe you're too young to
learn how to drive but
maybe learn to cycle or something so at
the beginning when you're just starting
to do something you really need to
pay attention to everything you're doing
you really need to think of every little
step right
once you kind of like learn that and
that sort of becomes really
automated in your brain you can sort of
like then
don't you don't need to use that many
attentional resources to do that
and then you can use the remaining
attentional resources to do something
else so now you can
cycle and you can chat with your friends
at the same time
you probably shouldn't do you should pay
attention to the road but
yes there is a yes we can multitask but
there is still a limit
of how many things we can do at the same
time and there's always a cost
so it we also have we we have this sort
of like attention resources and
you know there's a limit to that and we
it depends on
how many tasks we're trying to do at the
same time that means that if our full
attention is not into one of these tasks
then we're not going to probably perform
as good as we could
awesome i know i'm particularly not
great at multitasking so i i didn't
think that when
your question uh evelyn when you said uh
if humans are able to multitask i think
that's truer for some
uh more so than others at least from my
own experience
um but thank you very much for the
question thank you juan the answer um
one i think uh for you here tess um
do you think editing the way human
brains work could have
larger impacts or consequences on the
way humans function emotionally
oh i think that's a great one um and i'm
sure probably one will have
something to add on that too but in
terms of
um thinking about how changing our
brains could also change
our emotions yeah that's a really big
concern there are so many different
effects that
making one little change can have like
um
i was thinking the other day in my
research about memory changes
and if we could get people to have
enhanced memory like wouldn't that be
fantastic
but at the same time there's this
question of okay what if you
couldn't forget anything like does that
create trauma how do you feel about not
being able to forget something that you
might not actually
might not be a memory that you want to
keep so i think that yeah there are some
big ethical questions to ask there about
what are the side effects that we might
not even think of even when the gene
editing itself goes fine
but when there are side effects to just
having that kind of change the way that
every superhero has their limitations
yeah um juan did you have anything to
add i'll just add that for instance
there there's
uh so not only with emotions but uh just
an example that we actually find
cases in which something we call this
advanced syndrome
and there are cases in which there are
humans that you know have this you know
amazing
skills that are way above average but
like tess was saying it also comes at a
cost
so again this idea that we we our brain
tries to work
efficiently one of our super powers so
to speak
is precisely our flexibility our our
brain is very malleable and it changes
and it learns and forget things and that
forgetting is just to allow
to allow us to have more space to learn
something new so we can adapt to
different circumstances and different
environments
so i i think yeah so that's a good point
where
what tess was talking about and and in
this advanced syndrome like i said you
know
you might have this amazing skills but
it might you know also come up with some
some limitations for other things that
you also would would need to do
in order to you know work in you know
absolutely i think there's there's a lot
more work the general feeling i get is
there's a lot more work to be done
in terms of understanding how you think
you're changing one thing
but you don't we don't yet know how that
affects changing
other things which i guess is why your
work for example tests on
the ethics behind this all this is so
important to think about
um right so we've got one here now from
uh
i've lost my place lucy there it is
lewiston school uh have
asked i think this could be one for
everybody in fact um
does the idea of superpowers change over
time
as everyday things for us wouldn't be
useful for people in the past
so i think this is kind of saying that
you know let's say for example the fact
that today
we can do all this amazing stuff with
computers if you took that back to
let's say the middle ages you would be
seen as almost a superhero that you had
this incredible
device that allowed you to have all of
these abilities so
does anyone want to sort of perhaps
touch a little bit on
on how our perception of superpowers
might change or has changed
so yeah i was thinking in terms of if
you think about spiders
as an example so they've been around for
380 million years
so and they haven't been the same the
whole time so thinking about natural
selection
and evolution you're going to get
continuous
change and it's all to do with what is
best at that particular time
so absolutely i would expect there to be
change over time
and it's all to do with what we call
these selection pressures so basically
what gives the maximum amount of benefit
uh but it would be different for
different animals but
humans are also subject to a certain
extent
uh to natural selection and evolution as
well
yeah if i could um just build on that
too i think
we often don't even realize how things
um
like even basic education can be
considered an
enhancement or um something that has
become
so normal um or the way that education
has changed like
you know you didn't need to be able to
do math
like super long uh super ages ago but
you know the way that we or you might
have had to do it in a very different
way
you can see the way that what we need
changes and that's something that you
that we might need to
consider for the future too maybe the
changes that we would see as being
useful now and that we might think oh
okay
there could be great benefit to that we
should really implement that change we
should
make sure the people have this
enhancement or x-men ability
um that might not even be useful in a
few generations time
and where these things will affect not
just one person but all of their
children as well you think about those
long-term effects
yeah yeah i'll just add to that i mean
if we think about it like
some of the strongest animals that have
existed in in the history
of the earth were dinosaurs and they
became extinct so they couldn't adapt
well so i saw some comments talking
about like
perfections imperfections and you know
sometimes these imperfections like like
tess was saying
over time becomes some the actual thing
that makes you
adapt better to that environment
yeah no we've got to be careful i think
again it's sort of the message here
exactly about all of these things
awesome thank you on uh thank you
everybody in fact so
unfortunately we are actually coming
towards the end of the session
so just to make sure i get these in um
i've obviously got to say thank you very
much to
to all of our wonderful panel i will be
coming back to you for concluding
remarks
right at the end but again i just want
to say thank you and give you a round of
applause for my end and if everyone else
wants to give a round of applause in
their
school and watching at home that would
be fab um
and um the thank you for everyone
turning in your questions
sorry we didn't get to go through many
that there were literally hundreds of
questions popping up in my
in the chat box um so we will of course
be reading through them all
and we will select the most thought
provoking question
and send you a prize that one will be
announced uh soon on social media so do
even if now you have a question keep
sending it in because you can still win
the prize until the end
of this particular uh broadcast um and
of course
if you found this discussion interesting
and enjoyed this chat then do check out
all of the other big questions
uh on the explorer website oxford.org
it's all completely free and very fun
i think though i may be slightly biased
um so the answer to the quiz
as promised okay so the first one asks
those about deadliest animals
uh so the answer is the mosquito so very
well done everyone who spotted this i
actually knew this one because i had
this
in a board game i was playing recently
and that was the question
so the mosquito is the deadliest animal
on earth to humans through their
transmission of dangerous diseases
such as malaria and zika which effect
affects
thousands of people every year so whilst
the
you know you're thinking the snake sort
of bites people and poisons them it's
the mosquito
disease that makes them the most deadly
to humans
okay question two the rainbow loriket
cannot change color so all of the
animals can chameleons and occupy can
make rapid color changes to
camouflage themselves reflect their mood
or signal they are ready to mate
now stokes which i think was the red
herring in this question
so they actually shed their fur to match
their surroundings as the seasons change
so they are a rich brown color in the
summer and they are snow white
in winter so it's not quite a rapid
change but they are able
to to change color uh question three so
bottlenose dolphins are thought to have
the longest memories
with research showing that they can
identify the calls of former companions
after 20 years of separation
so elephants and chimpanzees are also
thought to have good memories
but the research here is limited so i
guess at the moment with our knowledge
we think it's dolphins but
i think most of them there actually had
very good memories
uh question four all of the animals can
repair themselves
uh from limbs to organs so different
some of them will regrow limbs and some
will repair
organs in their bodies so in particular
here at oxford we've been studying the
zebrafish
and the fact that they are actually able
to regenerate their own heart cells
and the hope is that by understanding
this we can maybe use this for
uh sort of patients who've suffered from
heart problems
and finally question five uh sardines
have special crystals on their scales
that enable them to reflect sunlight and
create the optical illusion that they
are
invisible which is used to escape
predators
so some types of shrimp can make
themselves invisible but not the red
shrimp
again there's a little bit of a red
herring to make that one a little bit
trickier so again thanks being part of
the quiz thank you for sending in
all of your questions i'm going to give
the panel about
20 each to give us their final thoughts
on the big question
uh can there be real life x-men and
we'll go to you beth first
so i think we can develop uh technology
as
tools to help us have x-men like powers
perfect i could be excited to wrap it as
well juan what's your thoughts on our
big question uh i i think it depends how
we define
superpowers but yeah i agree with that
we can use technology we can do
different things to enhance the things
that we so that's kind of like our
superpower we can learn
and develop technology to overcome any
limitations that we have
perfect and tests final thoughts yes i
think we definitely can i think it's not
as far into the future as we might often
assume
um and the question is just as much
whether we
should as what we can do what we should
do if we can
yeah brilliant that's needs me to say
thank you again to all of our panel
thank you everyone uh for joining in uh
check out oxford.org and we will be back
soon
uh with another live stream bye
[Music]
you